README.md, before:

# Healthcare Facility Data Processing Pipeline

> Event-driven serverless data processing solution using AWS Lambda, S3, and Athena

[![AWS](https://img.shields.io/badge/AWS-Lambda%20%7C%20S3%20%7C%20Athena-orange)](https://aws.amazon.com/)
[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.9-blue)](https://www.python.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Features](#features)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Stages Implemented](#stages-implemented)
- [Monitoring](#monitoring)
- [Cost Estimation](#cost-estimation)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## 🎯 Overview

This repository contains the implementation of Stage 1 (Data Extraction with Athena) and Stage 3 (Event-Driven Processing with Lambda) of the healthcare pipeline challenge. The solution implements a fully automated, serverless data processing pipeline for healthcare facility analytics.

**Key Achievement**: Zero manual intervention required from upload to results delivery.

## 🏗️ Architecture

![Architecture Diagram](docs/architecture/architecture-diagram.png)

### Data Flow

```
JSON Upload → S3 (medlaunch-assignment)
                ↓ (S3 Event Notification)
             Lambda Function
                ↓
        ┌───────┴────────┐
        ↓                ↓
    Athena Query    Store Results
    (Analytics)     (S3 Output Bucket)
        ↓
   JSON + CSV Results
```

See [Architecture Documentation](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) for detailed technical design.

## ✨ Features

### Stage 2: S3 and Athena Setup
- ✅ Dual S3 bucket architecture (source and output)
- ✅ Server-side encryption enabled
- ✅ Versioning for data protection
- ✅ Event notifications configured
- ✅ Athena external table with JSON SerDe
- ✅ Automated schema management

### Stage 3: Event-Driven Lambda Processing
- ✅ Automatic S3 event triggering
- ✅ Intelligent timeout handling
- ✅ Automatic retry mechanism (up to 2 retries)
- ✅ Dead Letter Queue for failed events
- ✅ Dual-format output (JSON + CSV)
- ✅ Comprehensive error handling
- ✅ CloudWatch logging and monitoring
- ✅ Production-ready configuration

## 📁 Project Structure

```
├── README.md                          # Main documentation
├── lambda/
│   ├── lambda_function.py            # Main Lambda handler
│   ├── requirements.txt              # Python dependencies
│   └── tests/
│       └── test_lambda.py            # Unit tests
├── infrastructure/
│   ├── cloudformation-template.yaml  # IaC deployment
│   └── iam-policy.json              # IAM permissions
├── docs/
│   ├── ARCHITECTURE.md              # Architecture details
│   ├── DEPLOYMENT.md                # Deployment guide
│   ├── TESTING.md                   # Testing guide
│   └── architecture/
│       ├── architecture-diagram.png
│       ├── data-flow-diagram.png
│       └── sequence-diagram.png
├── sample-data/
│   └── sample_data.jsonl            # Test data
└── scripts/
    ├── setup.sh                     # Automated setup
    └── deploy.sh                    # Deployment script
```

## 🔧 Prerequisites

- AWS Account with appropriate permissions
- AWS CLI configured (`aws configure`)
- Python 3.9 or higher
- Basic understanding of AWS services (S3, Lambda, Athena)

## 📦 Installation

### Option 1: Quick Deploy with CloudFormation (Recommended)

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/healthcare-data-pipeline.git
cd healthcare-data-pipeline

# Deploy using CloudFormation
aws cloudformation create-stack \
  --stack-name medlaunch-processor \
  --template-body file://infrastructure/cloudformation-template.yaml \
  --capabilities CAPABILITY_NAMED_IAM

# Wait for deployment to complete (3-5 minutes)
aws cloudformation wait stack-create-complete \
  --stack-name medlaunch-processor
```

### Option 2: Manual Setup

Follow the detailed steps in [DEPLOYMENT.md](docs/DEPLOYMENT.md)

## 🚀 Usage

### Upload Data for Processing

```bash
# Upload a JSON file
aws s3 cp sample-data/sample_data.jsonl s3://medlaunch-assignment/

# Monitor Lambda execution
aws logs tail /aws/lambda/MedLaunchProcessor --follow

# Check results
aws s3 ls s3://medlaunch-query-output/processed-results/
```

### Expected Output

Results are stored in two formats:

**JSON Format** (`processed-results/`):
```json
{
  "query_execution_id": "abc123-def456",
  "source_file": "sample_data.jsonl",
  "execution_time": "2024-11-20T10:30:00",
  "result_count": 3,
  "results": [
    {
      "state": "TX",
      "facility_count": "1",
      "total_employees": "250",
      "total_accreditations": "2"
    }
  ]
}
```

**CSV Format** (`csv-results/`):
Raw Athena query results in CSV format.

## 📊 Stages Implemented

### Stage 2: Infrastructure Setup

**Deliverables:**
- S3 bucket configuration with event notifications
- Athena database and external table creation
- Security configurations (encryption, IAM)

**Key Files:**
- `infrastructure/cloudformation-template.yaml`
- `docs/ARCHITECTURE.md`

### Stage 3: Event-Driven Processing

**Deliverables:**
- Lambda function with timeout handling
- Automatic retry mechanisms
- Query execution and result storage
- Comprehensive error handling

**Key Files:**
- `lambda/lambda_function.py`
- `infrastructure/iam-policy.json`
- `docs/DEPLOYMENT.md`

## 📈 Monitoring

### CloudWatch Metrics

Monitor these key metrics in AWS Console:

- **Invocations**: Total processing requests
- **Duration**: Average execution time
- **Errors**: Failed invocations
- **Throttles**: Rate limiting occurrences

### Alarms Configured

- Error rate > 5 in 5 minutes
- Average duration > 4 minutes (approaching timeout)
- Dead Letter Queue messages received

### View Logs

```bash
# Real-time logs
aws logs tail /aws/lambda/MedLaunchProcessor --follow

# Search for errors
aws logs filter-log-events \
  --log-group-name /aws/lambda/MedLaunchProcessor \
  --filter-pattern "ERROR"
```

## 💰 Cost Estimation

Estimated monthly costs for 1,000 file uploads:

| Service | Usage | Cost |
|---------|-------|------|
| Lambda | 1,000 invocations × 30s | $0.01 |
| Athena | 1GB scanned | $0.01 |
| S3 Storage | 10GB | $0.23 |
| S3 Requests | 2,000 PUT/GET | $0.01 |
| **Total** | | **~$0.26/month** |

*Costs vary by region and actual usage*

## 🧪 Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
cd lambda
python -m pytest tests/
```

For detailed testing procedures, see [TESTING.md](docs/TESTING.md)

## 🔒 Security

- S3 bucket encryption enabled (AES-256)
- IAM roles follow least privilege principle
- No hardcoded credentials
- VPC support ready (optional)
- CloudTrail logging enabled

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👤 Author

**Your Name**
- GitHub: [@arpitasidd](https://github.com/arpitasidd)
- LinkedIn: [Arpita Siddhabhatti](https://www.linkedin.com/in/arpita-siddhabhatti-17893b312/)

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- AWS Documentation
- Healthcare data standards (HL7, FHIR)
- Open source community

## 📞 Support

If you encounter any issues or have questions:

1. Check the [Documentation](docs/)
2. Search [Issues](https://github.com/yourusername/healthcare-data-pipeline/issues)
3. Create a new issue with detailed information

---

**Project Status**: ✅ Production Ready

**Last Updated**: November 2024# Healthcare-data-pipeline
Event-driven serverless data processing pipeline for healthcare facility data using AWS Lambda, S3, and Athena with automatic retry and timeout handling.

Commit message:

Expand README with stages and tools information
Added detailed descriptions of implemented stages and tools used in the healthcare pipeline challenge.

README.md, after:

# Healthcare Facility Data Processing Pipeline

> Event-driven serverless data processing solution using AWS Lambda, S3, and Athena

[![AWS](https://img.shields.io/badge/AWS-Lambda%20%7C%20S3%20%7C%20Athena-orange)](https://aws.amazon.com/)
[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.9-blue)](https://www.python.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Features](#features)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Stages Implemented](#stages-implemented)
- [Monitoring](#monitoring)
- [Cost Estimation](#cost-estimation)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## 🎯 Overview

This repository contains the implementation of Stage 1 (Data Extraction with Athena) and Stage 3 (Event-Driven Processing with Lambda) of the healthcare pipeline challenge. The solution implements a fully automated, serverless data processing pipeline for healthcare facility analytics.

**Key Achievement**: Zero manual intervention required from upload to results delivery.

## Stages Implemented
### Stage 1: Data Extraction with Athena

Extract key facility metrics from nested JSON data in S3
Handle complex nested structures (services, labs, accreditations)
Create external tables with proper schema definitions
Generate comprehensive facility metrics using UNNEST operations
Save query results to S3 in JSON format

### Stage 3: Event-Driven Processing with Lambda

Automatic triggering on JSON file uploads to S3
Execute Athena queries to count accredited facilities by state
Intelligent timeout and retry handling mechanisms
Store results in multiple formats (JSON and CSV)
Comprehensive error handling and CloudWatch logging
Dead Letter Queue for failed invocations

## Tools Used

AWS Lambda: Serverless compute for event-driven processing
Amazon Athena: Serverless SQL analytics for querying S3 data
Amazon S3: Data storage for input files and query results
AWS Glue Data Catalog: Schema registry and metadata store
CloudWatch: Monitoring, logging, and alerting
IAM: Secure access control and permissions management
CloudFormation: Infrastructure as Code for reproducible deployments

## 🏗️ Architecture

![Architecture Diagram](docs/architecture/architecture-diagram.png)

### Data Flow

```
JSON Upload → S3 (medlaunch-assignment)
                ↓ (S3 Event Notification)
             Lambda Function
                ↓
        ┌───────┴────────┐
        ↓                ↓
    Athena Query    Store Results
    (Analytics)     (S3 Output Bucket)
        ↓
   JSON + CSV Results
```

See [Architecture Documentation](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) for detailed technical design.


## 📁 Project Structure

```
├── README.md                          # Main documentation
├── lambda/
│   ├── lambda_function.py            # Main Lambda handler
│   ├── requirements.txt              # Python dependencies
│   └── tests/
│       └── test_lambda.py            # Unit tests
├── infrastructure/
│   ├── cloudformation-template.yaml  # IaC deployment
│   └── iam-policy.json              # IAM permissions
├── docs/
│   ├── ARCHITECTURE.md              # Architecture details
│   ├── DEPLOYMENT.md                # Deployment guide
│   ├── TESTING.md                   # Testing guide
│   └── architecture/
│       ├── architecture-diagram.png
│       ├── data-flow-diagram.png
│       └── sequence-diagram.png
├── sample-data/
│   └── sample_data.jsonl            # Test data
└── scripts/
    ├── setup.sh                     # Automated setup
    └── deploy.sh                    # Deployment script
```

## 🔧 Prerequisites

- AWS Account with appropriate permissions
- AWS CLI configured (`aws configure`)
- Python 3.9 or higher
- Basic understanding of AWS services (S3, Lambda, Athena)

## 📦 Installation

### Option 1: Quick Deploy with CloudFormation (Recommended)

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/healthcare-data-pipeline.git
cd healthcare-data-pipeline

# Deploy using CloudFormation
aws cloudformation create-stack \
  --stack-name medlaunch-processor \
  --template-body file://infrastructure/cloudformation-template.yaml \
  --capabilities CAPABILITY_NAMED_IAM

# Wait for deployment to complete (3-5 minutes)
aws cloudformation wait stack-create-complete \
  --stack-name medlaunch-processor
```

### Option 2: Manual Setup

Follow the detailed steps in [DEPLOYMENT.md](docs/DEPLOYMENT.md)

## 🚀 Usage

### Upload Data for Processing

```bash
# Upload a JSON file
aws s3 cp sample-data/sample_data.jsonl s3://medlaunch-assignment/

# Monitor Lambda execution
aws logs tail /aws/lambda/MedLaunchProcessor --follow

# Check results
aws s3 ls s3://medlaunch-query-output/processed-results/
```

### Expected Output

Results are stored in two formats:

**JSON Format** (`processed-results/`):
```json
{
  "query_execution_id": "abc123-def456",
  "source_file": "sample_data.jsonl",
  "execution_time": "2024-11-20T10:30:00",
  "result_count": 3,
  "results": [
    {
      "state": "TX",
      "facility_count": "1",
      "total_employees": "250",
      "total_accreditations": "2"
    }
  ]
}
```

**CSV Format** (`csv-results/`):
Raw Athena query results in CSV format.

## 📊 Stages Implemented

### Stage 2: Infrastructure Setup

**Deliverables:**
- S3 bucket configuration with event notifications
- Athena database and external table creation
- Security configurations (encryption, IAM)

**Key Files:**
- `infrastructure/cloudformation-template.yaml`
- `docs/ARCHITECTURE.md`

### Stage 3: Event-Driven Processing

**Deliverables:**
- Lambda function with timeout handling
- Automatic retry mechanisms
- Query execution and result storage
- Comprehensive error handling

**Key Files:**
- `lambda/lambda_function.py`
- `infrastructure/iam-policy.json`
- `docs/DEPLOYMENT.md`

## 📈 Monitoring

### CloudWatch Metrics

Monitor these key metrics in AWS Console:

- **Invocations**: Total processing requests
- **Duration**: Average execution time
- **Errors**: Failed invocations
- **Throttles**: Rate limiting occurrences

### Alarms Configured

- Error rate > 5 in 5 minutes
- Average duration > 4 minutes (approaching timeout)
- Dead Letter Queue messages received

### View Logs

```bash
# Real-time logs
aws logs tail /aws/lambda/MedLaunchProcessor --follow

# Search for errors
aws logs filter-log-events \
  --log-group-name /aws/lambda/MedLaunchProcessor \
  --filter-pattern "ERROR"
```

## 💰 Cost Estimation

Estimated monthly costs for 1,000 file uploads:

| Service | Usage | Cost |
|---------|-------|------|
| Lambda | 1,000 invocations × 30s | $0.01 |
| Athena | 1GB scanned | $0.01 |
| S3 Storage | 10GB | $0.23 |
| S3 Requests | 2,000 PUT/GET | $0.01 |
| **Total** | | **~$0.26/month** |

*Costs vary by region and actual usage*

## 🧪 Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
cd lambda
python -m pytest tests/
```

For detailed testing procedures, see [TESTING.md](docs/TESTING.md)

## 🔒 Security

- S3 bucket encryption enabled (AES-256)
- IAM roles follow least privilege principle
- No hardcoded credentials
- VPC support ready (optional)
- CloudTrail logging enabled

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👤 Author

**Your Name**
- GitHub: [@arpitasidd](https://github.com/arpitasidd)
- LinkedIn: [Arpita Siddhabhatti](https://www.linkedin.com/in/arpita-siddhabhatti-17893b312/)

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- AWS Documentation
- Healthcare data standards (HL7, FHIR)
- Open source community

## 📞 Support

If you encounter any issues or have questions:

1. Check the [Documentation](docs/)
2. Search [Issues](https://github.com/yourusername/healthcare-data-pipeline/issues)
3. Create a new issue with detailed information

---

**Project Status**: ✅ Production Ready

**Last Updated**: November 2024# Healthcare-data-pipeline
Event-driven serverless data processing pipeline for healthcare facility data using AWS Lambda, S3, and Athena with automatic retry and timeout handling.
